Reducing Distractions While Staying Connected

By now you’ve likely heard of Cal Newport’s ultra-successful book Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World. Published in early 2016, the book’s core ideas of eliminating distractions and taking a more purposeful approach to one’s work have more than proven their worth.

However, Newport’s audience was clearly an older one. Although much of the book’s advice holds regardless of age, some of Newport’s ideas on how to execute deep work fall on deaf ears among the younger generation. The idea of quitting social media, scheduling one’s day down to the minute, or never using the internet to entertain oneself simply doesn’t appeal to a generation that’s grown up with the iPhone since elementary school. And why should it? From Vine to Tik Tok, social media’s evolution has brought unparalleled connectivity, creativity, and laughter to a generation that doesn’t just use smartphones, but uses them as a primary medium of communication and connection.

Despite the new generation’s increasing reliance on smartphones though, Newport’s arguments for limiting screen time still hold some merit. Before you get scared off, I’m not here to lecture you about the mental issues associated with social media or the psychological burden smartphones present to the evolutionary mind of a hunter-gatherer. That’s absurd. Not because it’s not true (it almost certainly is) but because it’s impractical. Smartphones are here whether we like it or not. Social media and technology are only improving and becoming more embedded in society, not less. As such, the only practical advice is that which mitigates the weaknesses of technology while enhancing the benefits.

A Foundation of Deep Work
-------------------------
Before giving you the keys to technological enlightenment, it’s imperative to understand the premise behind Newport’s ideas of deep work. If you’d like a more complete synopsis of deep work and how to implement it, check out this article. If you’re more focused on simply reducing distractions though, all the necessary information is self-contained in this article, so feel free to continue.
As you’ve no doubt noticed, the world is changing. Fast. Not just fast, light speed. Technological growth has exponentiated the past few decades and shows no signs of slowing down. It’s unlikely this is news to you, but maybe it should be.
Stop and think for a second.

Our parents have undergone continual, extreme adaptation to keep up with technology’s evolution for the entirety of their lives. And that was at the very beginning of the digital revolution. If the past is any indicator of the future, technological improvement will be so rapid in the coming decades that adapting to it won’t be optional, it will be a necessity. In fact, it already is. Success in our digital society isn’t a single solution, it’s continual progress. This is Cal Newport’s core point for deep work. Technological improvement is changing the world exponentially. To thrive in this new era we must not only change with it but be among the first and best to do so. As you can probably guess, this requires deep work.
 
 
Deep Work: “Professional activities performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities to their limit. These efforts create new value, improve your skill, and are hard to replicate.”

Shallow Work: “Non cognitively demanding, logistical-style tasks, often performed while distracted. These efforts tend not to create much new value in the world and are easy to replicate.”

Deep work is your superpower to acquiring new skills and producing high-quality work. Despite what the somewhat casual naming of deep work might lead you to think, deep work is mentally exhausting and requires absolute focus. To be working deeply means to be so entrenched in a task that you nearly forget the outside world exists. Most individuals can’t apply this much focus for more than ninety minutes a day (Newport argues that 4 hours a day is the limit, even for the most seasoned deep work vets). But the results from such activities produce 2x, 5x, and even 10x productivity compared to other work. As you can see, if these numbers are even half true, deep work holds a master key to rapidly learning new skills and producing at an elite level. The skills necessary to thrive in our society are best learned and implemented through deep work.

Distractions
------------
The rise of technology, while bringing about unrivaled societal improvements, has also brought about nearly infinite distractions (the kryptonite of deep work). From your smartphone to the news station, the entire world is vying for your attention. Fortunately for you though, a few simple steps can reduce distractions in your life and finally free up mental space for absolute focus. Three points regarding distractions are critical to understand if one wants to effectively reduce distractions.

- Attention Residue: your brain’s ability to focus has an adjustment period when switching from one task to another.
- Information Overload: checking Twitter, Instagram, and even texts during work steals your attention for fifteen minutes (or more) after putting your phone down.
- Multi-Tasking: it’s simply impossible, stop trying.

Attention Residue
-----------------
Attention residue is a real killer of your ability to focus. Essentially, the brain needs time to fully shift its mental resources completely from one subject matter to another. This usually takes 10 or 15 minutes but may take far longer depending on your mental state at the moment, the difficulty of work, your energy levels, etc. Attention residue becomes especially problematic when you’re constantly checking your phone (or hearing notifications) while trying to learn or do important work. Every time you check Twitter for the latest news and funniest clips you aren’t just spending time on your phone, you’re giving away your attention for the next 15 or 20 minutes after putting your phone down.
 
Information Overload
--------------------
The issues of attention residue are further compounded when accounting for the readily available and inherently entertaining news one finds on their phone. Social media is constantly vying for your attention; they make a profit by selling your attention to advertisers and are very good at doing so (Facebook was recently valued at 1 trillion dollars). Everything you see on social media is meant to evoke an emotion of some kind because that’s what piques your interest. Whether it’s the latest scandal, a blockbuster NBA trade, or some fashion model showing off their vacation on a private island, everything is meant to hold your attention as long as possible. This type of information, which literally never ends, not only distracts you but steals your attention for far longer than 15 minutes. Instead of focusing on the task at hand, your mind can’t stop daydreaming about relaxing on a beach in Hawaii or wondering what the landscape of the NBA will look like next season.

Multi-Tasking
-------------
Constantly checking your phone leaves you with attention residue throughout your work, severely short-circuiting your work quality and productivity. This is, at the very least, important because you’re unnecessarily spending time that could be used for other activities like binge-watching Money Heist. Further concerning though are the individuals who convince themselves they can complete quality work and watch Money Heist. Multi-tasking is a myth. It’s been proven for ages that your brain cannot focus on two things at once, only switch between tasks quickly. As we’ve already discussed though, this is extremely ineffective as attention residue will perpetually limit your ability to focus. You need to give all your attention to one task at a time or your quality and efficiency of work will suffer. Stop multi-tasking. Please. It is not possible.

Eliminating Distractions
------------------------
As previously mentioned, deep work is providing ultra-focus to a single task, and distractions are the bain of focus’ existence. I can’t say that enough so I’ll say it one more time. Deep work requires intense focus. Distractions destroy focus. Okay, now that you’ve (hopefully) internalized the significance of eliminating distractions, let’s eliminate them.

1.	Take Control of Your Phone
2.	Schedule Your Day
3.	Make Your Environment Work for You

Take Control of Your Phone
--------------------------
When I say take control of your phone am I saying your phone controls you? Well, yes. Am I judging you for that? Absolutely not. If I did I’d be a hypocrite. The essential point to understand about your phone is that it’s a tool. It’s no different from a bike or a pair of scissors except the fact that it’s an infinitely more useful tool…while also infinitely more addictive. With that addictiveness comes a level of responsibility though. If you’re serious about eliminating distractions you need to control how much you use your phone.

The first step is to decide what apps distract you the most. This likely includes TikTok, Instagram, YouTube, Twitter, Netflix, Snapchat, arcade games, etc. Once identifying these apps, decide what times of the day are appropriate for you to use them. As a gentle reminder, the morning is your most distraction-free and productive part of the day. With that in mind, a good schedule for app restriction is to only use them an hour during lunch and then a large chunk in the evening (the last four or five hours of your day). This allows you plenty of time to use the apps but restricts it to certain time windows so you aren’t interrupting your work with unnecessary distractions.

Now, comes the easy part — sticking to the app schedule you set. I don’t trust myself to not use my phone and neither should you. Luckily you don’t have to. Using Screen Time on your iPhone, you can set DownTime limits on your phone. This will restrict app and notification access for specified apps during specified times of the week (as we already discussed). Use this two-minute tutorial on how to schedule DownTime if you run into any trouble.

Once you’ve scheduled your DownTime, grab a trusted friend and have them set up a Screen Time passcode on your phone (which is different from the passcode to unlock your phone) that only they know (use this other two-minute tutorial for how to implement a Screen Time-specific passcode). And you’re done! Now if you want to use apps not in the “always allowed” list, you’ll either have to wait for those specified times or make an embarrassing call to your friend explaining why you need the Screen Time passcode to look at more TikToks.
 
Schedule Your Day
-----------------
The second step, scheduling your day, seems somewhat unrelated to eliminating distractions but is extremely effective. This is explained by the fact that we often aren’t off task due to lack of motivation or discipline, but due to lack of clarity about what “on task” actually means. How do you expect yourself to do work when you aren’t sure when you’re supposed to do it? Yes, you know you’re supposed to write that essay before Wednesday but that’s not good enough. You need a specific time, place, and estimated duration for when you will complete the essay. Otherwise, you’ll convince yourself you have time to do it “later”. But do you?

Scheduling has the double benefit of answering that last question as well. By scheduling out your day (with specific durations for each task), you can visibly see how much time you have left in the day. And more often than not it’s far less than you think. By clearly seeing the domino effect of how getting off task will eat into your other tasks as well as your free time later that day (or worse yet the weekend), you’ll be far less likely to succumb to distractions.

If you’re still not convinced to schedule your day, watch this five-minute clip on how scheduling can improve your life. If you are sold on a schedule, great! Use this video to help you implement a schedule.

Make Your Environment Work for You
----------------------------------
This last tip is subtle but surprisingly powerful. When doing work, I used to convince myself I could focus with my phone on the table, friends sitting across from me, and in an uncomfortably loud environment (usually lots of people). As you can guess, this was extremely unproductive. While I technically got some work done, it was taking me three or four times longer than it should have.

People often tell me they focus well in loud environments because noise doesn’t affect them and they’re just “so special”. While it’s possible my jealousy of such a skill led me to write that last line, so far science tells us that loud environments reduce attention significantly. If presented with evidence that such people do truly exist, I sincerely apologize. Even if you could focus well in loud environments though, could you not focus better in a quiet, distraction-free environment? Then why wouldn’t you do work in environments that maximize focus and concentration? This way you can complete higher-quality work in less time, effectively buying you extra free time to fully immerse yourself in things you truly enjoy.

The same logic can be applied to anything that distracts you. Your phone? Turn it off and place it in a different room. Your friends? Study alone to get work done quicker and spend more quality time with them. Studying on the couch or in bed? Again, study at a desk so later you can spend more time truly relaxing on the couch or in bed. The TV? I’m not going to explain this one because I think you get the point: place yourself in an environment that naturally fosters focus. It’s infinitely easier to focus when you’re sitting alone in a room with nothing else but your work sitting in front of you.

Give It a Try, You Can Always Go Back
-------------------------------------
At this point, you might be thinking these tips are slightly extreme and require some effort to implement… which is true. However, I’d like to remind you the potential benefits far outweigh the startup costs of using Screen Time, implementing a schedule, and being cognizant of your environment. Increased focus will propel greater quality of work in less time, allowing you to spend more time on activities you truly want to do. This can be time spent binge-watching TikTok or watching TV if that’s what you really want! I have personally implemented all three of these tactics and have never turned back.

My challenge to you is this: try one of the three tips for eliminating distractions for 30 days. If you don’t like it, no sweat. You can always stop. If you find benefit as I did though, continue trying the other two tips, and (hopefully) you’ll experience the massive benefits of fewer distractions just as I have.
